---
title: "How to succeed in my exam"
tags: ["education", "teaching", "R"]
comments: true
---

This short post describes how to succeed and how to fail in answering
a typical exam question in one of my bachelor courses. I even believe
it is applicable later when tackling more complex data analysis
questions in a research project.


{% include toc %}

## The question

The student is provided with an object of class
[`SummarizedExperiment`](http://www.biocondoctor.org/packages/SummarizedExperiment),
called `se`, that contains (part of the) data from *The effect of
upper-respiratory infection on transcriptomic changes in the CNS* by
[Blackmore *et al.*
(2017)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5544260/):


> **Purpose**: The goal of this study was to determine the effect of an
> upper-respiratory infection on changes in RNA transcription occurring
> in the cerebellum and spinal cord post infection.
>
> (The provided data here only contain the cerebellum samples.)
>
> **Methods**: Gender matched eight week old C57BL/6 mice were
> inoculated saline or with Influenza A by intranasal route and
> transcriptomic changes in the cerebellum and spinal cord tissues were
> evaluated by RNA-seq at days 0 (non-infected), 4 and 8.

The student is asked to visualise the gene expression distributions in
each sample using violin plots and to colour these based on the
infection statues, *Influenza A* or *Non-Infected*.

## Pre-requisites

There are several ways to produce this visualisation. Here, the
students have learnt to use the
[tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/) and about
`SummarizedExperiment` objects, and not (yet) with base plotting. The
goal of this question is for them to demonstrate they can extract
different sub-parts from a `SummarizedExperiment`, know how to
transform and combine them using standard `dplyr` functions and
eventually visualise them using `ggplot2`.

## It's a trap

The main trap many students fall into is to start writing code before
having thought about how to answer the question. They have access to
the lecture notes and code as well as past exam questions. They often
start by copying code that apparently (at least) partially addresses
the question, and try to modify it until "it works". Student often end
up wasting precious time with this random trial and error
strategy. This trial-and-error approach equates to randomly taking
buses until one brings them to they expected destination by sheer
luck... which is extremely unlikely when several buses are needed to
reach that destination.

## A conceptual solution

My suggestion is to first think about how to answer the question
before actually answering. As a way of focusing on the how, let's
first sketch out an plan, starting from the end.

1. Based on the question, I anticipate to have a figure with samples
   along the x axis and expression values along the y axis, with
   violin plots of different colours based on the infection status. I
   typically recommend students to have a go with pen and paper and
   draw such a hypothetical figure.

2. We can already easily write code that produces such a figure,
   assuming that we have a long `data.frame` or `tibble` named `x`,
   that contains three columns, namely `expression` with the
   expression values, `sample` containing the sample names and
   `infection`, with the *'Influenza A* and *Non-Infected* sample
   infection status.

   ```r
   ggplot(x, aes(x = sample, y = expression, fill = infection)) +
       geom_violin()
   ```

3. From the previous step, we know we will need the expression data,
   the sample names, and their respective infection status. Even
   without looking at the actual data, we know how to extract these:
   `assay(se)` gives us the expression data, with column names
   referring to the sample, and `colData(se)$infection` (or simply
   `se$infection`) provides the infection status (assuming that it's
   encoded by the `infection` column variable).

4. We also know that `assay(se)` returns the data in a wide format,
   with genes along the rows and samples along the columns. Given that
   we want to produce the figure sketched out in step 1 using
   `ggplot()` in step 2, we need to convert it into a long table,
   which we can do use with `pivot_longer()`.

   ```r
   pivot_longer(assay(se),
                names_to = "sample",
                values_to = "expression",
                everything())
   ```

   The code above will fail because `assay(se)` returns a matrix, but
   `pivot_longer()` expects a `data.frame`, as mentioned above. We
   thus need to convert the matrix as shown below:

   ```r
   pivot_longer(as.data.frame(assay(se)),
                names_to = "sample",
                values_to = "expression",
                everything())
   ```

   This will generate something quite close to what we need, a table
   with the `expression` and `sample` columns. We are still missing
   the `infection` status.

5. We know from step 3 that the infection status is available from the
   `colData`, that we need to merge to our long two-column table from
   step 4. This can be done with `full_join()`. Below, I use the pipe
   operator to continue the chunk written above.

   ```r
   pivot_longer(as.data.frame(assay(se)),
                names_to = "sample",
                values_to = "expression",
                everything()) %>%
       full_join(colData(se))
   ```

   There are two errors in the code above. First, we need to convert
   the `DataFrame` returned by `colData(se)` to a `data.frame` (or
   `tibble`). This is easy. The second (likely) error lies in the
   variable names used to join the tables (`full_join()`'s `by`
   argument). If we have a `sample` variable in the `colData` that
   contains sample names, the join will succeed. Otherwise, we will
   need to defined the vector of variables to join by using `by`. We
   can also create that variable on the fly using
   `tibble::rownames_to_column()` knowing that the rownames of
   `colData` match the sample names (by definition), and set it to
   `sample`.

   ```r
   pivot_longer(as.data.frame(assay(se)),
                names_to = "sample",
                values_to = "expression",
                everything()) %>%
       full_join(rownames_to_column(as.data.frame(colData(se)),
                                    var = "sample"))
   ```

## Bringing it all together

In the previous section, I already wrote syntactically correct code,
ironing out smaller issues such as conversion to `data.frame` and
variable matching. I haven't run the code, but I'm quite confident it
should work with my `se` object, as long as the infection status is
encoded as `infection` in the `colData`. A conceptual solution without
these details would already earn students a very decent grade. The
effort to produce the actual figure and earn full marks is relatively
minor, once the path to the answer is mapped out. Referring back to
the travelling by bus illustration above, this conceptual solution is
similar to having the bus names, their respective stop, and possibly
even times mapped out. All that is left is to execute the actual
travel plan.

```r
pivot_longer(as.data.frame(assay(se)),
             names_to = "sample",
             values_to = "expression",
             everything()) %>%
    full_join(rownames_to_column(as.data.frame(colData(se)),
                                 var = "sample")) %>%
    ggplot(aes(x = sample, y = expression, fill = infection)) +
    geom_violin()
```

## Conclusions

There is of course a much more direct solution, using `boxplot()` on
the assay matrix and setting the `col` argument with the infection
state vector. This solution is one that student would most likely
implement after following the second year of the bioinformatics
curriculum. In the [first year](http://bit.ly/WSBIM1207), we start
with general data manipulation and visualisation using the
tidyverse. Omics data and `SummarizedExperiment` only come later, as a
preparation for the [second](http://bit.ly/WSBIM1322) and
[third](http://bit.ly/WSBIM2122) years. Other examples won't simplify
that nicely though. But the important fact remains that elaborating a
solution will always reply on a good understanding of the basic data
structure and their manipulation and, using that understanding,
conceptually sketch an initial path to the solution.

While I do emphasise the reasoning and concepts behind the code when
introducing new material and solving exercises in class, I appreciate
that when learning a programming language for the first time, one
tends to focus on the syntax (the interpreter isn't forgiving, after
all) and it can be difficult to step back and look at the bigger
picture. This is probably something I will need to pay special
attention to from now on.

## Some context

I came to write this post following several discussions with students
during office hours. These discussions led invariably to the same
conclusion: those that struggle in class and during the exams struggle
to conceptualise the course material. Despite honest efforts, every
exercise comes across as a new beast to tame - they fail to visualise
the common patterns and start from scratch at every attempt, which is
not only very inefficient, but also leads to considerable stress,
which itself amplifies perceived difficulty of the task.
