---
title: "Open and reproducible management and dissemination of knowledge"
tags: ["open research", "reproducible research", "circle u", "ECR"]
comments: true
---

This post is part of my application for the [Circle
U](https://www.circle-u.eu/) chair at the UCLouvain. The seven
partners of Circle U set up a [chair
programme](https://www.circle-u.eu/education-research/chair-programme/)
to *ensure strong and sustainable connections across our universities,
between research and teaching, between students and staff, and between
universities and society*.

My proposal for the Circle U chair can be articulated around the
following question:

> How is knowledge produced, maintained and shared?"

with a special focus on global health in an area of big,
inter-connected data and collaborative research.

Universities are the focal point of **knowledge production** in our
society. This knowledge is produced by the scholarship, research and
development activities that are part of the academics' principal
duties.

The **maintenance of this knowledge** is arguably the weakest link of
the knowledge chain. How data, experimental designs, results,
know-how, processes and operation procedures are produced, curated,
documented and maintained over time is all too often done using ad hoc
procedures, with little or no systematisation. This leads to little
scope to scale up to new challenges and opportunities. The activity of
doing research and the management of these output is lacking the
professionalisation and standardisation that one could expect for such
fundamental and expensive activities.

The **dissemination of this knowledge** takes various forms. Education,
the prime form of transfer of knowledge in universities, has widely
diversified in recent years, with the digitisation of the education,
the scale up and diversification of the student population, the
increase in multi-way interactions between instructors and
learners. This evolution is bound to continue to face novel
challenges. Knowledge is also transferred between researchers. This
dissemination takes the form of research articles, monographs, oral
presentations among restricted audiences. This mode of communication
has hardly evolved since the Royal Society started publishing research
articles, despite the radical (r)evolution of modern research, and the
advent of modern information and communication technologies. A third
major mode of information dissemination, between the universities and
the public is arguably the least active form of knowledge transfer.


## Proposal

The premise of my proposal is that many of the current challenges in
large scale, high throughput, collaborative health-related research
activities, notably those that try to bridge disciplines, is
**inefficient management and transmission of knowledge**. I would argue
that the **application of open and reproducible research principles and
tools can address these challenges**. This proposal is based on my own
practical experience in quantitative and computational biomedical
sciences, my decade-long advocacy for open and reproducible
research, and my participation in the Open Science Steering Committee
of the UCLouvain.


It is essential to clarify a misconception about **openness** in
research. It does not imply wild and immediate sharing of research
outputs, which is particularly sensitive in clinical settings, when
ethical and privacy concerns are paramount. Openness doesn't enforce,
but offers transparency and the possibility to disseminate
appropriately, whether locally in a research lab, an institute, a
global research network or to the public. **Reproducibility** in
science and research defines the opposite of anecdotal
observation. Reproducibility is a property that leads to trust in an
experiment and its interpretations. Reproducibility is also a
necessary quality to transmit knowledge.  **Openness and
reproducibility are hallmarks or rigorous, accountable and
transmissible science.** My proposal aims at promoting and
implementing open and reproducible research, focusing on the
management and the transmission of knowledge in a biomedical and
global health context.


## Education

I will be organising, contributing or promoting courses, seminars and
workshops to raise awareness about and help implementing open and
reproducible research to students, early career researchers (ECR),
notably new PhD students as part of the doctoral schools, new
academics arriving at the university and researchers across the
institutes (As a member of the Open Science piloting committee, I am
already committed to several of these actions at the UCLouvain). To
maximise the impact of these initiatives, they should be informed or
led by the students and ECR themselves to (1) maximise the
effectiveness and long-term penetrance of these efforts and (2) make
sure that the prime beneficiaries are the students and ECR themselves.

In addition, and specifically as part of the international reach of
circle U, I want to expand these efforts by sharing and contributing
these activities with our partners and beyond through the organisation
of international conferences and summer schools that will promote
these best practices and apply existing tools and resources.


## Research

My goal in terms of research is to foster collaborative projects
between engineering and health-oriented research teams. These include
for example the development and application of

-   software engineering practices to research processes and data
    management, notably continuous integration (i.e. the continuous
    testing and validation of data, software or results) to facilitate
    reproducible and transparent research in biomedical and clinical
    research, and

-   machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms to integrate
    global health and clinical data across data types and physical
    locations.

The expected outcomes of such efforts are (1) becoming better at
scaling up (increase in size) and scaling out (increase in diversity)
our capacity in managing digital health data, (2) the production and
management of more transparent knowledge and, ultimately, the (3) the
delivery of high quality, data/knowledge-driven health care.


To reap the benefits from this proposal, it is essential that open and
reproducible research principles **percolate throughout all strata of
universities and society at large**. To do so, I believe that in
addition to becoming part of the curriculum and widely discussed among
scholars, these principles should also become part of the **academic
governance**, such as the academic evaluation process.


Finally, in a time where informed expertise on global health and mere
opinions have been confronted and considered equivalent, it is
absolutely essential to emphasise open and reproducible principles as
pillars of research and to broadcast these widely outside of the
university. I thus also advocate for a dedicated online and media
presence (again, involving students and ERCs) and close collaboration
with existing academic and non-academics initiatives.
