---
title: "Open position in the CBIO lab: single-cell proteomics"
tags: ["job"]
comments: false
---

A fully-funded position for a PhD student (4 years) or a post-doctoral
researcher (2 - 3 years, depending on experience) is open in the
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics lab (CBIO) at the de Duve
Institute, UCLouvain in Brussels, Belgium.

The [CBIO lab](https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-lab) has developed a
leading expertise in mass spectrometry-based [single-cell proteomics
data processing, analysis and
interpretation](https://paperpile.com/shared/h96mgS) and is looking
for a researcher to contribute to this research theme. The position
will focus on computational and statistical approaches, including
research software development, integration with other omics
modalities, and could, depending on the candidate interests and
experience, also include a small wet lab component.

The successful candidate will have a degree in bioinformatics,
statistics, computer sciences, biomedical sciences, bio-engineering,
or equivalent and be able to demonstrate experience and/or keen
interest in one or several of the following:

- experience in one or multiple omics experimental technologies, data
  processing, analysis and/or interpretation - experience in mass
  spectrometry and proteomics is an advantage;
- a keen interest in understanding and tackling biomedically relevant
  questions;
- interest in robust method development;
- background/expertise in statistics, machine learning and/or
  artificial intelligence;
- open and reproducible research (e.g. Rmarkdown, Jupyter notebooks,
  Github, version control, ...);
- research software development (e.g. unit testing, version control,
  continuous integration, ...);
- experience in R/Bioconductor data structures, in particular those
  used for omics data analysis (e.g. SummarizedExperiment,
  SingleCellExeriment, QFeatures, ...);
- contribution to an open and inclusive research environment;
- good written and oral communication skills.

The project is funded by the Fonds National de la Recherche
Scientifique (FNRS). The position is open immediately until filled.

## About the CBIO lab

The Computational Biology and Bioinformatics lab is headed by Prof
[Laurent Gatto](https://lgatto.github.io/about) and is composed of
students and researchers with expertise in biomedical sciences,
statistics, omics data analysis and bioinformatics. Details about our
work and the members can be found at
[https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-lab/](https://lgatto.github.io/cbio-lab/).

The lab supports a friendly and supportive work environment through
flexible working hours and the possibility to work remotely. The lab
meetings are typically scheduled in-person (or mixed remote/in-person)
to favour interactions among lab members. While joining the lab and
contribution to our research, you will also have the opportunity to get
involved in the international Bioconductor community. The lab members
have opportunities to join courses and conferences in Belgium and
abroad to present their work.

## Academic environment

The [de Duve Institute](https://www.deduveinstitute.be/) is a
multidisciplinary biomedical research institute (250-300 scientists)
hosting several laboratories the UCLouvain, as well as the Brussels
branch of the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research. The focus is on
basic research in the fields of tumour immunology and signal
transduction in cancer, genetics and development, including human
genetics, stem cells and organ development, infection and inflammation
and metabolism and hormones. The de Duve Institute also features
several core facilities, including imaging, transgenesis, mass
spectrometry, flow cytometry and cell sorting, as well as
genomics. The de Duve Institute provides access to a high-performance
computing cluster and storage, managed by a dedicated IT team.

## Application

To apply for the position, please send the following documents to
Laurent Gatto:

- A cover letter describing why you would like to join the lab and how
  you match the requirement;
- A detailed CV including, depending on seniority, some or all of the
  following: a list of publications, pre-prints, posters and/or
  software contributions; a link to publicly available code/data
  analysis you have contributed to; education and professional
  experience; current and past positions; awards; obtained funding;
  teaching experience; any additional information you deem relevant.
- If no code is publicly available, please include code chunks that
  illustrate best your programming experience and interests.
- Among your publications/software/projects, select up to 3 and
  provide a short narrative describing why these are important in your
  career, your specific contributions and/or the unique skills you
  have gained through these.
- A list of at least 2 (for a PhD application) or 3 (for a
  post-doctoral researcher application) academic references.

Expectations are different for PhD or PDRA application and will be
assessed accordingly.

For more details, feel free to contact Laurent Gatto at
`laurent<DOT>gatto<AT>uclouvain.be`.

You might also be interested in [this
position](https://lgatto.github.io/spatprot-job-2023/).

Please do share this position with your students and colleagues.
