---
title: Engaging Researchers in Good Data Management
tags: ["data", "OSC", "research data", "data champion"]
comments: true
---

Last months, I participated in the *Engaging Researchers in Good Data
Management* meeting organised by the Office of Scholarly Communication,
SPARC and Jisc
(details
[here](https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/engaging-researchers-in-good-data-management-registration-37769325068)).


As a researcher who cherishes good and reproducible data analysis, I
naturally view good data management as essential. I have been involved
in research data management activities for a long time, acting as a
local
[data champion](https://www.data.cam.ac.uk/data-champions-search?search_api_views_fulltext=Gatto) and
participating in open research and open data events. I was interested
in participating in this conference because it gathered data
champions, stewards and alike from various British and European
institutions (Cambridge, Lancaster, Delft), and I was curious to see
what approaches were implemented and issues were addressed across
institutions. Another aspect of data championship/stewardship I am
interested in is the recognition these efforts offer
([this post](https://lgatto.github.io/DataChampions-Sept-2017) touches
on this a bit).

Focusing on the presentations from Lancaster, Cambridge and Delft, it
is clear that direct engagement from active researchers is essential
to promote healthy data management. There needs to be an enthusiastic
researcher, or somebody that has some experience in research, to
engage with the research community about open data, reproducibility,
transparency, security, ...; a blunt top-down approach lead to limited
engagement. This is also important due to the plurality of what
researchers across disciplines consider to be data. An informal
setting, ideally driven by researchers and, or in collaboration with
librarians, focusing on conversations, use-cases, interviews, ... (I
am just quoting some successful activities cited during the conference)
have been the most successful, and have sometime also lead to new
collaborations.

Despite the apparent relative success of these various data
championing efforts and the support that the data champions get from
their local libraries, these activities remain voluntary and come with
little academic reward. Being a data champion is certainly an
enriching activity for young researchers that value data, but is comes
with relatively little credit and without any reward or recognition,
suggesting that there is probably room for a professional approach to
data stewardship.

With this in mind, I was very interested to hear the approach that is
currently in place at TU Delft, where data stewards hold a joint
position at the Centre for Research Data and at their respective
faculty. This defines research data stewardship as an established and
official activity, allows the stewards to pursue a research activity,
and, explicitly, links research data to research and researchers. 

I am wondering if this would be implemented more broadly to provide
financial recognition to data stewards/champions, offer incentives
(in particular for early-career researchers) to approach research data
management professionally and seriously, make data management a more
explicit activity that is part of research itself, and move towards a
professionalisation of data management posts.
