---
title: "Being a better scientist with open and reproducible research"
tags: ["open science", "open research", "reproducible research", "talks"]
comments: true
---

This blog post summarises the notes for my talk at the [Are you ready
for publishing reproducible
research?](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/are-you-ready-for-publishing-reproducible-research-tickets-55561449792)
meeting at the TU Delft on the 16 May 2019.

{% include toc %}

Disclaimer: I do not speak from authority[^auth]. I speak of personal
experience. My experience is in computational biology, bioinformatics
and high throughput biolofy data. My experience doesn't directly
translate to other fields or domains (for example when it comes to
data privacy) or even to other personalities in the same field.

[^auth]: I actually think that authority (or seniority) isn't doing
    any favours when it comes to open research and
    reproducibility. The more senior stakeholder all too often aren't
    those that drive research toward more openness and
    reproducibility. There are, fortunately, notable exceptions.

Note 1: A priece of open research doesn't automatically make it good,
where here good is defined as of high academic quality. A piece of
closed research doesn't make it bad, where bad here is defined of low
academic quality. So openness doens't equate to academic quality. But
openness provides some desired quality (i.e. desirable property)
independent from academic excellent. Openness leads to trust.

Note 2: A priece of reproducible research doesn't automatically make
it good, where here good is defined as of high academic quality. A
piece of non reproducible research doesn't make it bad, where bad here
is defined of low academic quality. So reproducible doesn't equate to
academic quality. But reproducibility provides some desired quality
(i.e. desirable property) independent from academic
excellent. Reprodcibility leads (among other things) to trust.

Note 3: Open research and reproducible research aren't the same thing,
and one doesn't imply the other. They are historically also very
different. (see tweet from Oliva Guest)

Take home message:

- Open isn't binary, it's a gradient.
- Reproducibility isn't binary, it's a gradient.


## Misc

- There isn't only one type of open research

- Can mean different things to different people 

- Let's be open and understanding of different situations and constraints 

- Open also philosophical 


- How to: Make alies (other ecr, librarians, data stewards, rse,
  on-line networking, ...)


## Why open and reproducible research?

### Why becoming an open research practitioners

- It's th right thing to do. (?)

- benefits for your academic career. (?)

- Networking opportunities (I'm here thanks to my open research
  activities with my former colleage Marta Teperek at the University
  of Cambridge, UK).

- Any risks?

### Why becoming a reproducible research practitioners


> And so, my fellow scientists: ask not what you can do for
> reproducibility; ask what reproducibility can do for you! Here, I
> present five reasons why working reproducibly pays off in the long
> run and is in the self-interest of every ambitious, career-oriented
> scientist.

Florian Markowetz, **Five selfish reasons to work reproducibly**,
Genome Biology 2015, 16:274. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0850-7

1. Reason number 1: reproducibility helps to avoid disaster
2. Reason number 1: reproducibility helps to avoid disaster
3. Reason number 3: reproducibility helps reviewers see it your way
4. Reason number 3: reproducibility helps reviewers see it your way
5. Reason number 5: reproducibility helps to build your reputation


## Why reproducibility is important

- scientific reasons
- political reasons

Ruedi refers to nature initiatives

- my take: cns are part of the problem, prestige rather than
  quality is prioritised.

- another view: open and reproducible research?

reproducibility
- same same -> same data?
- same data -> same results?


## Types of reproducibiliy

See also Gabe's talk


An Imperfect Guide to Imperfect Reproducibility (2019) May Institute
for Computational Proteomics 2019 - Slides
(https://gmbecker.github.io/MayInstituteKeynote2019/outline.html) -
Video Forthcoming



From Leek and Peng (2015) (https://www.pnas.org/content/112/6/1645):

Its better not to use reproducibility and replicability interchangeably: 

- reproducibility = get same results from data and code 
- replicability = get similar results from new experiment 

So most research is not reproducible, let alone replicable.

(https://twitter.com/robustgar/status/1127890626345938947/photo/1)

## What can you do to improve research reproducibility?

- be an open research practitioners
- be an reproducible research practitioners

- peer-reviewer
- when publishing
- early career researcher?


## Open research and open research


